[Music]
welcome to westminster abbey on the eve
of commonwealth day now each year
traditionally a vibrant service is held
attended by the queen but this year is
slightly different
the dean has very kindly allowed us to
invite some of the brightest
and most talented performers in the uk
into the abbey to celebrate the
commonwealth
we're also honored to have contributions
from the royal family
her majesty the queen will share her
commonwealth day message and the prince
of wales
the duchess of cornwall the duke and
duchess of cambridge and the countess of
wessex
will join us in marking this very
special occasion
now although they can't be here in
person we'll also be hearing from
inspiring commonwealth voices from
across the globe
as we celebrate the commonwealth in 2021
[Music]
thank you dean of westminster for
welcoming us to your abbey
um it's wonderful to be in this
magnificent building
tell us about commonwealth day and its
connection to this place
uh we've been doing this for a long time
it's been annual since 1972.
it's a great occasion for us and we
really enjoy the relationship with the
royal commonwealth society
all all the commonwealth countries have
national days and on their national days
the high commissioner and very often
members of the high commission
come to the abbey and will say prayers
for them so
i've been here just over a year now and
when we were allowed i was getting into
the rhythm of
meeting these people for whom the abbey
and the commonwealth
and that association was really
important we're steeped in it here
and we kept those prayers going uh
throughout this last year
at the moment there's no international
travel people are feeling very isolated
around the country why is it so
important do you think
to reach out and celebrate our global
community one of the things the
commonwealth
does is to remind us that actually
distance doesn't stop
friendship and commitment and of course
we need to obey the rules at the moment
but we also need to remember
that our future is to be together living
together in peace and friendship
and this service is a great reminder of
what people can achieve together
and what is her majesty the queen's role
in the commonwealth
she's the head of the commonwealth uh
and that's clearly
critical but that doesn't quite tell you
just
uh just what her significance is uh over
over many long years it's her manchester
the queen
who's told us what the commonwealth is
all about
that it's about loyalty and friendship
and a commitment
to peace and to freedom she is the
person who over and over again has put
it into words
she also lives the commonwealth but her
coronation
her dress was covered in the flowers of
the commonwealth
for her it is a way of life and
being by this coronation chair we just
get reminded of the promises she made
that's an oath and she's taking it
seriously
well thank you once again for inviting
us in thank you
[Music]
[Applause]
is
[Music]
[Applause]
yes
[Music]
is
[Applause]
over the coming week as we celebrate the
friendship
spirit of unity and achievements of the
commonwealth
we have an opportunity to reflect on a
time
like no other whilst
experiences of the last year have been
different
across the commonwealth stirring
examples of courage
commitment and selfless dedication to
duty
have been demonstrated in every
commonwealth nation and territory
notably by those working on the front
line who have been delivering health
care
and other public services in their
communities
we have also taken encouragement from
remarkable advances in developing new
vaccines and treatments
the testing times experienced by so many
have led to a deeper appreciation of the
mutual support
and spiritual sustenance we enjoy by
being connected to others
the need to maintain greater physical
distance
or to live and work largely in isolation
has for many people across the
commonwealth been
an unusual experience in our everyday
lives
we have had to become more accustomed to
connecting and communicating
via innovative technology which has been
new to some of us
with conversations and communal
gatherings
including commonwealth meetings
conducted online
enabling people to stay in touch with
friends
family colleagues and counterparts
who they have not been able to meet in
person
increasingly we have found ourselves
able to enjoy such communication
as it offers an immediacy that
transcends boundaries
or division helping any sense of
distance to disappear
we have all continued to appreciate the
support
breadth of experiences and knowledge
that working together brings
and i hope we shall maintain this
renewed sense of closeness and community
looking forward relationships with
others across the commonwealth will
remain
important as we strive to deliver a
common future
that is sustainable and more secure
so that the nations and neighborhoods in
which we live
wherever they are located become
healthier
and happier places for us all
one
[Music]
three little birds
this is my message
[Applause]
is
[Music]
[Applause]
let's get
and i will
and i will feel
the bob marley classics three little
birds and one love performed by the acm
gospel choir
and the dole foundation and we're
grateful to reese edward for carrying
the commonwealth flag
our next contribution comes from the
prince of wales
on commonwealth's day i am reminded once
again
that the essence of the commonwealth is
its remarkable diversity
a family of some 2.4 billion people
from 54 nations across six continents
whose traditions knowledge and talents
offer an incomparable richness of ideas
and perspectives on the world we share
when we gathered here in westminster
abbey
on commonwealth day last year such a
challenge was unfolding at a scale that
few could have imagined 12 months on
the coronavirus pandemic has affected
every country of the commonwealth
cruelly robbing
countless people of their lives and
livelihoods
disrupting our societies and denying us
the human
connections which we so dearly cherish
amidst such heartbreaking suffering
however
the extraordinary determination courage
and creativity with which people have
responded
has been an inspiration to us all
this pandemic has shown us the true
nature of a global emergency
we have learned that human health
economic health
and planetary health are fundamentally
interconnected
and that pandemics climate change and
biodiversity loss
are existential threats which know
no borders nature
it seems to me is at the heart of this
she is central to all aspects of our
existence
from the air we breathe our nourishment
and shelter to our spiritual cultural
and recreational well-being
universal principles rooted in the
harmony
of nature's patterns cycles and geometry
can in fact be harnessed to inform
sustainably aligned science technology
design
and engineering encouragingly
it is increasingly our young people who
make up
sixty percent of the commonwealth
citizens who
instinctively understand how critical it
is
to protect and restore the natural world
the commonwealth is on the front line of
this endeavor
over the years having visited almost
every part of the commonwealth i
i have seen for myself so many of the
remarkable landscapes
and marine environments and the precious
biodiversity they hold
i have also seen how the remarkable
ingenuity and
talent across the commonwealth can
provide
so many of the solutions be it
renewable energy in india regenerative
agriculture in south africa
green hydrogen in australia
sustainable shipping in barbados
reforestation in rwanda
the marine economy in fiji or
nature-based solutions in canada
the commonwealth is at the forefront of
global innovation
and action for my part i am determined
to do what i can to support this vital
effort
which is why i recently launched my
terra carter to serve as the basis
of a recovery plan for nature people and
planet
the commonwealth has been a cornerstone
of my life for
as long as i can remember it is my
dearest wish that
it might also be the cornerstone of a
sustainable future for us all
as we recover from everything that we
have endured and
continue to enjoy through this pandemic
we have an unprecedented opportunity to
change course by harnessing
the extraordinary potential of our
commonwealth family
we are uniquely placed to lead the way
so let us be the boldest of the bold
and let us offer an example to the world
[Music]
i was lucky to grow up in one of the
most forested regions in kenya
and i remember planting my first tree at
the age of seven
and even being able to see clean streams
that i could directly drink from
and i would say this connection made me
develop a very strong love for nature
i got to feel angry about seeing people
cutting down trees and even passing by
places and finding people maybe throwing
trash
out of car windows my name is elizabeth
mathuti i'm an environmentalist and a
climate activist
and i'm working to create a livable
world now and a safe future for all
by inspiring the young generation we
want everyone to understand
that nature is a part of us and not
apart from
us
[Music]
nairobi river has of course been
polluted as a result of different
challenges and the contributors can be
citizens and also big
industries at the same time so every
person is a part of this problem
and so at one point in time i took
children to see the state of the
pollution
and i remember that i could see the
sadness in the eyes i could see that
they were very much devastated
and of course two questions that these
children asked me and one of them was
who did this and the other question they
asked me was what can we
do about this
[Music]
so i thought to myself why not create a
generation of young people
who are environmentally conscious and
who can have that chance to also
connect to nature at a young age and
love nature at a young age
and what happens when you love something
are you going to destroy it
no are you going to interfere with it if
you love a tree so much are you going to
cut it down
no i decided to begin a campaign that i
dabbed a doctor tree campaign
whereby i would ensure that every child
in every school in my country gets a
chance to plant and adopt a tree each in
the school compound
it's not just about planting a tree it's
about planting a tree
watering it nurturing it and making sure
that that tree grows up to maturity
because just like we human beings need
tenderness and we need love and we need
all the care to survive
the same thing we need to put when it
comes to how we
address nature much of what i do
is about changing people's mindsets and
perspectives about appreciating
the natural world by working with young
people in this way
i feel so much hope because the young
people are courageously stepping up
and standing up to shape the kind of
future that they want to see
and this makes me feel hopeful about the
future of this country and the future of
the world
[Music]
keep moving keep changing
keep flowing with the sun
oceans rise rivers rise
people rise
[Music]
if i could set with the sun
tears falling rain falling
leaves
[Music]
if
if i were always alone
if i were never to see
you if i could sit with a son
[Music]
if were never to leave you
if i were
[Music]
what always sunset says
rivers rise people rise
with the sun oceans rise
[Music]
well i won't be forgetting that in a
hurry our thanks to nathan sawney for
that beautiful
performance now the duchess of cornwall
has a strong interest in reading and
literacy
and has launched an online reading room
she met with claire balding
and global teacher prize winner ranjit
singh disli from india
in poet's corner here in westminster
abbey
sitting here in poet's corner with
memorials to
hundreds of wonderful writers it seems
the perfect place
to discuss the importance of children's
literacy
and it's a subject very dear to my heart
as an author of children's books and i
know your rawhide is something that you
care about passionately
i've always had a passion for books
books have been
part of my life for so long i started
reading when i was very very young with
a with a father who was a
fervent bibliophile so from from
the age of two or three he used to sit
and read to us children
take us on wonderful adventures sort of
all over the world
and i think i was bitten at that age and
from then
i've i just kept going and i've got um
involved in a lot of literacy
programs and patronages
i i just feel very strongly that all
children should be taught to read
and getting access to books is is
crucial for that and we're joined live
on screen from india by ranjit who won
the global teacher prize
for for 2020. ranjit can i ask you how
have you tackled those challenges and
how also have you made
education fun because that's something
you really
believe in ah it was not a easy task for
the girls were sitting at home taking
care of their little brothers and
sisters
but they were not caring about girls
education
so i invited the girls from nearby
cities nearby villages who were
studying well inviting them in this
clues
and study with them a role model before
the parents
now look at this girl if they can do
it means your girl can do as well it's
now
your responsibility to empower your
daughter and give her her birthright
a quality education i've been doing some
online
reading ma'am with my with my niece
who's 10.
so she reads a bit of a book and i read
a bit of a book so we have the shared
experience and actually
for all that you know it has separated
us the the pandemic at least with the
internet we can be
connected and there's so much that
becomes possible
that i have to admit i have to put my
hand up so
before lockdown i wasn't a great lover
of the internet in fact i i was always
trying to reach these
machines away from my grandchildren but
since lockdown i'm afraid i have i have
to admit i have become
a little bit of an addict during the
first lockdown
i just thought it might be a good idea
to to make a list of
some of my favorite books online another
asset of the internet
so i launched a reading room which is a
book club but it's
it's my reading room it's fascinating
how much it connects
people all over the world but what it
does as well is it creates a shared
experience and i think that's what we've
all been missing so much yes we've
actually been able to have it through
sport or theater or the usual outlet so
actually
lots of people reading the same book and
then having you know
quite an active conversation it is you
could share it all you know
and i said you we've all been breath of
friends and a lot of people surrounding
us so it's nice to have a way of
chatting
it is extraordinary actually how much
more the internet has been able to
to give children and adults access to
books and and ranjit how has that
impacted your students being able to
read online and being taught online
yeah their experience with the power of
internet as well
and reading online has actually improved
them to expose themselves to new things
it also helped my students and improve
their imagination
you know there is no limit to
imagination
what you can imagine limitless and also
it improves to reduce stress
can i ask ranjit one question um there's
a wonderful
writing competition that i'm part of
called the queen's
commonwealth essay competition where we
get
uh children from the commonwealth to
submit an essay and i think it'd be
lovely
if you could get your girls to join in
and and write an essay i'm definitely
uh doing that thank you so much for
giving me opportunity
well thank you so much your highness and
thank you to ranjid
be far or be you near somehow for me
you're always there
i say a prayer and sing a song i always
know it won't be long
be i alone or not i know i never am
you're ever
close from city side to countryside
to continent to country i take pride in
knowing that i ever love
the when below lifts me above together
we
in unity will be again in time to be
but tired we are by lines of love across
the world the tides are none
to separate the thing we share that
somehow always keeps us here
i know my loved ones far and wide will
soon again be by my side
though much we learn in times of woe i
know these days are soon to go
so come what comes well come what may if
you're with me i'll be okay
although we've been apart some days here
on the line i know you'll stay
and one day soon i know we'll sing about
the former harder things
the troubles that we've all been through
that time and strength will take us
through
to days of joy and light and mirth
where you be upon the earth so when you
celebrate
and do know that we are here with you
different parts of the commonwealth have
had very different experiences of covert
19.
in new zealand with low levels of
transmission life has continued as
normal in many parts of the nation
this has allowed the new zealand youth
choir to keep singing
and keep sharing their music they
recorded a special maori song of
greeting for us
a call of friendship despite the
[Music]
distance
[Applause]
[Music]
foreign
[Applause]
[Music]
foreign
my god
[Music]
oh
foreign
my
[Applause]
that was so joyful our thanks to the new
zealand youth choir
now the 8th of march not only marks
commonwealth day it's also
international women's day and the
countess of wessex was joined by author
and broadcaster june sarpong
and two female activists virginia
congooni from malawi
and caitlin figueredo from australia
hello
everybody uh and welcome hi caitlin how
are you
i'm very good royal annas hi virginia
how are you it's nice to see you again
thank you so much i'm glad to be here
brilliant now of course you're both
uh part of the queen's young leaders and
what would be lovely
uh caitlyn is if you could begin to tell
us some of the work that you've done
yes so um i run an organization called
jazeery australia
so we are a youth lead organization
operating in commonwealth countries
so we're all about trying to change the
face of leadership by providing
young women with opportunities to be
political leaders and policy change
makers
wonderful now ma'am i know for you
gender equality is something that you're
very passionate about why do you think
it's important to have organizations
like this
working at the grassroots to really
empower
the next generation of female leaders
there's no end of passion from young
people
and there's no end of desire to want to
do something
but often i think they find um what's my
next step how do i get involved
so for caitlyn to have created an
organization
to put them in front of people where
they can start to feel that they're
having an influence is astonishing
so virginia can you tell us a bit about
the work that you do
yes i run an organization called girls
arise for change
which works to promote goals to health
and education
by ending social and cultural practices
that undervalues women's
potential here in malawi i actually got
to visit
um virginia's one of virginia's projects
when i was in malawi
um so i saw firsthand what they're
actually doing with these young women
and i think what's really important here
is that she's helping them to create
training and business models that
actually are appropriate
to where they are we need to train more
women to become financially independent
that is by
not by giving them money to run
businesses but by giving them the skill
because when we give them a skill
the skill is a life it's a lifetime
asset for them than giving them money
um often women's voices are not heard at
the top and we don't have a seat at the
table not
in the numbers that we should um how do
we
ensure that that becomes the norm
especially with everything that we see
happening with kovid and the fact that
actually
we are regressing better policy and
better outcomes
are achieved when women are in the room
when
more than half the population are in the
room and getting to make sure
that all of their voices all of their
issues are represented
brilliant i love that and ma'am would
you like to add to that
uh that can become
a bit of a fatigue when it comes to
talking about
women's rights women's issues and
everything and so
i'm quite keen to try and move the
discussion
into a place where it becomes a much
more level playing field because it is a
win-win it's not one against the other
if we now can look at education
particularly in in countries where
virtual education
isn't as easily available um
what do we do to ensure that our young
girls
don't get left behind through this
process where i am right now in malawi
the majority of schools do not have
online learning because many many
students do not have laptops we can't
even talk about
internet so as we are going back to uh
developing education
uh through this coffee pandemic we
really have a very
big job because we've had a setback it
is a real worry because there's
obviously a lot of
the commonwealth countries that have got
we're
still trying to get girls into education
where are the gaps going to be there
what is going to be happening to those
girls right now
young people in particular they have
those innovation mindsets they they want
to
support and they want to connect i
always say as women we need to
learn that we are not competitors but we
are supporters of each other's progress
so as women we should be able to share
each other's skills women should be
those that are in higher positions
should open up to
give opportunities to those women that
are coming those women that are
inspiring
and the commonwealth is a great force
for good
i think if we can keep coming together
and and talking to each other and using
the technology that's now at our
fingertips that really has proven its
worth
during this last year let's use that as
a force for good
on that note thank you so much ma'am uh
thank you caitlyn
thank you virginia it's been a pleasure
leading this conversation with you all
and continue the fantastic work sports
plays an important role in the
commonwealth
denise lewis shared her experiences i
was born in west bromwich
in the midlands to a jamaican mother
although we were immersed in an english
way of life
there was always a tinge of jamaican
flavour in the house
whether it was music cooking or the
patwa that would bellow out of my
usually reserved mother's mouth
when england played the west indies
cricket team
all these influences combined to give me
a strong sense of my heritage
and our commonwealth connection like
many other athletes
my first experience of a major
international competition
was the commonwealth games a games which
are sometimes actually referred to as
the friendly games
but with a healthy balance of fierce
competition
it's a tournament unlike any other with
a strong spirit of unity
permeating through every element
all of the competing countries share the
bond of the commonwealth
the national teams whose individual
sports usually train apart
all come together with disabled and
non-disabled athletes
uniting together to represent their
countries
in 1994 i went into the heptathon
competition
mentally unprepared to be crowned
commonwealth champion
and the games changed my life as they
have done
for many others before and since
i had the pride of returning to the
games four years later as favorite
and retaining my title really was a
dream come true
and like so many people around the
commonwealth i can't wait
for the games to return next year for me
it will be like coming home to the city
where my aspiration was forged
to the host city of birmingham this year
all around the commonwealth
the doors of gymnasiums were closed and
the stadium lights were turned off
but in the face of adversity giving up
was never an option athletes have been
demonstrating
enormous resilience and resourcefulness
finding new ways to train
as all our lives have been impacted by
the coveted pandemic
they have shown unwavering grit and
determination
to keep pushing towards their goals i
look forward to the enjoyment
we will all share as our best athletes
once again
unite to display their exceptional
talent
and their years of hard work i wish all
competitors
the very best of luck as we all look
forward to witnessing once more
the power of the games to change lives
as we
celebrate the best of the commonwealth
[Music]
do
simply sublime our thanks to alexis
french jim nast
georgia may fenton and denise lewis and
we all look forward to the commonwealth
games in birmingham
next year now the pandemic has been
extremely hard for many of us but one
positive that it has shown
are the networks of care that our
communities are founded on
now many have been put under intense
strain but people across the world have
adapted
and worked hard to do all they can to
help the duke and duchess of cambridge
have spoken to three inspirational
voices from across the commonwealth
hello my name is doctor zolais
i am a medical doctor and a frontline
health worker
all the way from south africa advocating
for
the healthcare workers in the world
today can you hear us oh hi
yes hello
maybe could you give us both just a
little bit of a a brief picture what
it's like in south africa at the moment
with covid
we're basically struggling and facing
the branches that i think are the
healthcare workers who
are trying you know their best to be
there and
and do all the work and get all the work
done but the problem is
we are stressed as well we are burnt out
as well we are burdened you know
um and it's been like this for years we
have been exposed to occupational
illnesses i myself
got multi-drug resistant tuberculosis as
a medical student
it's been tough because of the
circumstances that we've had to practice
under anyway and now the pandemic has
put on a bit more a lot more pressure
here in the uk there's been a massive
sort of public recognition of
the amazing work the frontline are doing
and it it's sad almost that it's taken
the pandemic
for the public to really back and
support all those working on the front
line
we actually know the problems we see the
problems every day
we walk into work they're the problems
but the problem is
our voices are not heard we are on the
front lines and we are expected to
lift humanity so my advice to everybody
is to
if you know a healthcare worker any
healthcare worker you just love on them
love on them love on them some more if
their child needs looking after
offer you know if they need a meal offer
we
you know catherine i've spoken to a lot
of healthcare workers in the uk and
around the world
over the last year and we hear your
worries and your concerns and
thank you for your time chatting to us
about it thank you
you know for sharing for us and asking
for help for us so
thank you very much
[Music]
my name is faisal islam and i am the
co-founder of safeway
an affordable emergency medical service
provider for the rural people of
bangladesh
faisal um we've been hearing a little
bit about your safe wheel idea can you
tell us a little bit about it
so a couple of years ago my best friend
uncle had a road accident and just
because he couldn't manage
an ambulance during that time
he died because in our country there are
very
few ambulances for rural people
so our solution is that we designed a
low cost
mini ambulance so now they can get an
ambulance
with very affordable costs unlike the
regular ambulance and we have plan to
reach as many villages as possible and
help more people
and how are your rickshaws kitted out uh
what we have is
basic healthcare equipment like an
oxygen cylinder
and some other source of necessary
equipment
that can save
the patient during that emergency
situation
faisal very nice to meet you and you
know it's a fantastic idea and
we both wish it every success in the
future thank you very much your
[Music]
highnesses
my name is heidi kwajiklee and i'm the
founding director
of refuge for the refugees a non-profit
organization that seeks
to raise awareness regarding the plight
of refugees in malaysia
as well as provide education for refugee
children
maybe you could just give us a little
bit of a picture as to why your
organization refuge for the refugees
even needs to exist what is it there's a
situation like
uh in malaysia that made you want to set
this up when refugees are here in
malaysia they don't have access to
education
health care job opportunities so they're
often in limbo
you know and not everyone gets resettled
if even if they do the waiting process
is anywhere between 10 to 15 years
and these kids if they don't get access
to education of sorts
they get left behind for a very long
time and
heidi has the recent pandemic made it
even more challenging
not only for you to carry out the work
but also for the refugee communities
the lockdown has been difficult because
the reality is for the refugee migrant
community
they don't have access to wi-fi or
internet or devices
that allows you know online engagement
so i think that has been hard
and hardy do you know how many refugees
have benefited from your programs
i guess in total we've reached about um
close to 200 000 refugees wow yeah
that's uh
that's a sizeable amount of people
you've reached and it's some it's
fantastic what you're doing and
just a huge congratulations from
katherine and i i think in terms of what
you're what you're managing and
dealing with and especially now
obviously with the extra challenges
but really well donna you're obviously
have a vital source and a vital support
to
to all those um refugee communities out
there so keep up the hard work
thank you thank you so much nice to see
[Music]
our little brother
how i love you together
[Music]
together
you stay
[Music]
without you would only mean heartbreak
for me
[Music]
my darling believe me for me
that is
[Music]
into my prayers
together
heartbreak
for me
[Music]
our thanks to leanne lahavers for that
very special performance
and to all our contributors that have
been part of this unique
commonwealth celebration we now hear
from commonwealth secretary general
patricia scotland let us pledge
ourselves afresh
to uphold the values of the commonwealth
that every person possesses unique worth
and dignity that we should be good
stewards of nature
and of the whole earth that there should
be justice for everyone
and peace between nations that joining
together
as a worldwide family we build on shared
inheritances
that we cooperate with mutual respect
and goodwill
to deliver a common future for the good
of all
and through commonwealth's connection we
learn from
one another and innovate to transform
our communities
our nations and our world
in this house of prayer year by year we
celebrate our life as a commonwealth
and as god's people in the midst of a
challenge that we all share
we ask for god's guidance and grace in
looking for a better future
that we can also share it is our prayer
that we might be agents of a deeper
peace
and a greater justice so we ask for the
gifts
of an imagination that can hope
abundantly
and a courage to seize that hope
confident in the richness and range of
our commonwealth today
we seek god's blessing that we might be
a common people
in a commonwealth of grace
lord god hope of all the nations when we
feel isolated and alone
strengthen the bonds of our affection
when we face illness and death
renew our confidence in you when fear
and mistrust
infect our words renew us in the truth
and when we have great challenges before
us strengthen us
bless we pray our queen the work of the
royal commonwealth society
and our shared witness that this
commonwealth of nations
may be a sign of the hope that is in us
and a glimpse of the glory that you
alone can give
as our savior taught us so we pray
our father who art in heaven hallowed be
thy name
thy kingdom come thy will be done
on earth as it is in heaven give us this
day
our daily bread forgive us our
trespasses
as we forgive those who trespass against
us and lead us not into temptation
but deliver us from evil for thine is
the kingdom
the power and the glory pravanable amen
[Music]
foreign
oh
[Music]
is
foreign
[Music]
is
[Applause]
[Music]
is
for the joy of your love
[Music]
foreign
is
[Music]
[Applause]
foreign
is
[Music]
from the jewish community in canada may
the almighty bless the commonwealth
of
[Music]
god bless and protect the commonwealth
of communities
[Music]
may god bless all the people
of the commonwealth
god grant to the living grace
to the departed rest to the church the
queen the commonwealth
and all people peace and concord
and to our sinners life everlasting
and the blessing of god almighty the
father the son
and the holy spirit be amongst you and
remain with you
always amen
you